Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, Ricardo Lopes and today I'm
joined by Doctor Craig Callender. He, he is status
Chancellor's professor of philosophy and founding faculty and co-director
of the Institute for Practical Ethics at the University
of California San Diego. And today, we're talking about
the philosophy of physics with the focus on time
and also uh how it compares to our intuitive
model of time. So Doctor Callender, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to have you everyone.
Hi, thank you very much, Ricardo. It's a pleasure.
So, before we get into the physics itself, uh,
just to talk a little bit about how we
as humans, uh, into it time. So we have
this, or we tend to have this model of
time where we think about it as, uh, flowing
present that divides the fixed past from an open
future. I mean, comparing it to physics or, uh,
how we think about time in physics. Uh, I
mean, how close is, is it?
Um, YEAH, I think it's, well, I think at
the kind of fundamental level, it's basically wrong. Uh,
BUT, uh, yeah, so in my book, I call
this model, uh, manifest time, and I don't mean
it necessarily as like manifest in the sense of
the time you observe, but it's sort of like
this sort of more common sense model of time.
Um, AND so, yeah, you, you think that this
moment, this moment we're talking right now is, uh,
you know, distinguished in the world. It's the only
thing that's happening and that it divides the world
into two, you know, and it's the present that
it's the, but it divides, you know, the past
from the future and, uh, the past and the
future, we tend to think of very different from
one another, you know, so that. Past is very,
is fixed, uh, the future open. And then we
think this whole structure just kind of updates itself
and moves. Um, YEAH, and then I think, well,
that, that actually, from the point of view of
physics, I think is, is, uh, at. Well, it's
wrong. OK,
so then what is the correct uh view of
time, how does time actually work in physics?
Yeah, so if we, well, you know, we, we,
we can look at different physical theories, but if
we think of relativity as sort of the theory
that Uh, explicitly tackles time. Uh, THEN, you know,
there, you know, on, on the, in the relativistic
universe, what you have instead is, you know, a
bunch of all of the events of the universe
also laid out in this kind of four-dimensional manifold.
And you don't really think of um time is
a fundamental aspect of this, you know, famously Minkowski
said, you know, with space, uh, you know, that
space and time we're doomed to fade away into
mere shadows. Um, AND so in a relativistic universe,
you don't need This kind, you will, a, you
don't have a distinguished moment uh moment of simultaneity.
But really the, the common sense picture is more
than about simultaneity. It's about, you know, I kind
of distinguished now, which is like an indexical, you
know, so now is now, but now, now is
now and, you know, and so the physics, even
even before relativity didn't make use of uh distinguished
now, even when you had simultaneity like in classical
physics. Uh, SO I think even classical physics shows
that are Common sense, conception of time is not
right, or at least it's, it's not, it doesn't
vindicate it, maybe I should say. Um, And uh
yeah, so in, in, in physics then, but then
relativity is sort of makes it even worse for
common sense time. Uh, IT'S uh not only it
makes it harder to, if you think of it
like common sense time as a kind of model
and you try to like graft it onto the
relativistic universe. It's very hard to do that in
a non-arbitrary way.
But I, I mean, compared to the way we
commonly think about time, I mean, our sort of
folk physics, let's say, uh, this time actually have
uh a direction or even or a fixed direction
or not?
Uh, ACCORDING to, yeah, I think according to the
kind of folk model, it definitely does. So I
think of, well, I think of, so I'm thinking
of the folk model, I'm thinking of, you know,
past, present, future, and then that distinguishes the, the
future from the past in a kind of intrinsic
way.
Uh, BUT, but then, uh, I mean, uh, what
about the model that we have in physics? Does
it have any direction or not?
Uh, WELL, it, it, it, yes and no. Uh,
SO I, uh, think that, you know, there are,
so when we think about that in physics, we,
we ask, you know, are the laws, uh, what
they're called time reversal invariant. And so if you
know, viewers want to think of it intuitively, you
know, just think of like a kind of film,
you know, you have a film of the universe
and then you run it backwards. Is the, is
what you saw backwards also a solution to the
laws of physics? And if not, then it seems
like the laws care about the direction of time.
And so when it comes to some of the
big famous equations, uh, fundamental equations of physics, it
seems like they are time reversal invariant that I,
if I ran everything backward, it would be possible.
That's certainly the case of classical mechanics. Um, But
there are these, you know, phenomena in quantum field
theory that do seem to be time, not time
reversal invariant. Um, AND then there's this other symmetry
people talk about called CPT, which is the combined
operations of flipping charges. Flipping spatial handedness and then
flipping the direction of time. And then physics is
invariant under that. And so if that is sort
of like the modern version of thinking of time
time reversal environment, then it's uh That then physics
is, uh, you know, invariant of that. That is
if I gave you a movie. Uh, OF the
universe, and then I switched all the charges, positive
to negative, switched all the hands from right-handed to
left-handed, and then switched the direction of time, then
you couldn't tell the difference between the two. Um
And so, well anyway, yeah, so that, that may,
might clash with our ordinary uh conception of time,
uh, that, you know, firmly has a direction in
it. Mhm.
And where this time come from exactly? I mean,
how does time arises?
Uh, I guess I think there's Well, there's no
real answer to that question, you know, so I
think of time as just a kind of non-fundamental
aspect of spacetime. And then if I, if I,
so that if I translate the question to You
know, is, uh, where spacetime come from? And I
think, well, spacetime just is, uh, so it's a
bit like, you know, why, you know, why, then
the question becomes more like, you know, why, why
is there something rather than nothing or why is
there being rather than not being? And then I
just think there's not really an answer to that
question. We've reached the limit at that point.
Yeah, uh, but when it comes to the space
time continuum, I mean,
I,
I'm not sure if this question even makes sense
or at least the way I'm going to put
it, but Um, how does time relate to space?
Exactly.
Uh, YEAH, so it's, um, If you, um, how
does time relate to space? Yeah, so they, they
have 22 different. DIMENSIONS of the space-time continuum. And
so there, but It's not, um, in relativity, it's
not like that, it's not like you just sort
of You know, in classical physics, you could sort
of think of like the universe is like a
big, you know, I don't know, a, a big
ham or a salami, and I sli put it
into the slicer and I slice, slice, slice, slice,
slice. And each slice is entirely spatial and there's
one way to do the slicing. In relativity, You
could do that kind of slicing, but it's not
unique. And so there's all these other ways you
could you could have sliced the, the ham or
the the spacetime manifold. And the time is the
direction in which You know, that's sort of orthogonal
to all those possible slicings. Uh, SO there's all
these different ways you could do the slicing and
time is the sort of direction, so really we
should speak about the timelike directions in relativity. So
what directions are the timelike ones, and those are
the ones that will allow this kind of slicing
to happen. Uh, AND so it relates to space.
It's just, it's another, um, Well, it's another direction
on the manifold.
Mhm. But uh, but I mean, what are maybe
the distinctions between the space-like and the time-like directions
in physics?
Yeah, so that's really a huge uh issue uh
and really uh very important uh because Once people
think about and people tend to go to relativity
and they start thinking about it, then they think,
well, yeah, time is just another dimension of the.
Uh, OF a four-dimensional kind of block, and then
they think it, it's then, you know, like space.
But it's not like space, it's, you know, the,
so the fundamental feature of relativity is the, the
metric, which gives the distances between events. And the
dis the distances between events in the timely direction
are um of one. Of one sign, either positive
or negative, and the distance between the the the
space-like ones are the other sign. And that little
sign difference, so sometimes people just talk about like
there's just a minus a minus in front of
the time like directions. Uh, THAT little minus sign,
it seems like it's not that important. But that
little Einstein is massively important, and so it ends
up making all the difference, uh, excuse me, all
the difference between the, the space-like and the timelike
directions. And so you can have um You know,
there's uh and and what behavior and how that
how that then that mind sign then hooks into
the rest of physics. Like about with the, with
its relationship to mass, its relationship to the dynamics
of what happens, all is very, very different. And
so to me when I don't, when I see
that little minus sign, uh, I think, you know,
I don't try to obscure. I, I don't pretend
it's only a little minus sign. I see it
is really like the core difference between the space
like in the time like and you know, super
important, which leads to basically all the important physical.
At a gross scale, all the important physical features
of, of the physical world.
But, but, but then just to clarify one point
that you made there, when people say, which is
something that we commonly hear that physics specializes time
that is incorrect.
Right. That's right. I think that's uh uh incorrect
and that that. That that saying that has led
to, you know, uh uh really a misunderstanding of
relativity and led to You know, I think, I
think some of the less productive directions and philosophy
of time. Um, YOU know, so people have said
this many times, uh, you know, where they say,
uh, you know, so Bergson famously said that, uh,
you know, physics, uh, spatialized time. And I think,
you know, there's a certain way of seeing it
where maybe, maybe, you know, it, well, I don't
think it does at all, but I think what's
going on is this, you know, so in, when
we think of the spatial, we don't think of
the Um, We might call the, uh, the kind
of the spatial the indexical terms as as objective.
So I say I'm here, I'm here and and
here means San Diego, you're there and you're there
in Portugal, and then I might move, I might
fly to Portugal, and then I then my here
is Portugal. And no one thinks that the spatial
here is important in any way, uh, you know,
objective, uh, sorry. And So, And then, and so
then when we get to relativity or, or physics,
it doesn't require the indexical time counterparts of those
spatial indexicals. So it doesn't require a now um
and uh uh a past or a future. You
can just have all the earlier than later than
relations. Just like in space, you can have all
the, you know, just to the right of or
to the left of or something. We don't think
of those as You know, that you don't think
that there's like a right side to the universe.
And so when we say that physics spatialized time.
Um, MAYBE if we just meant, well, it, we
don't objectify the temporal and dexicles. Well then that
might be right. But then classical physics didn't do
that either. And so it it's not really um
You know, uh, and we, you know, so. That
doesn't mean that for the non-indexical stuff that space
and time are, are, are treated the same way.
They're clearly not, even even in classical physics. So
I think that we've never specialized uh time in
one sense, or we've always specialized time in this.
Weaker sentence, uh, but the important thing is that
in the terms of the non-indexical stuff. We've never
specialized time and relativity certainly doesn't do it either.
Mhm.
Yeah, yeah, I, I guess that also, uh, I
mean, many things in science are extremely counterintuitive, but
probably things coming from physics are some of the
most counterintuitive out there and particularly when it, when
it comes to the time and the space-time continuum,
I mean, it's very easy for us to imagine.
A 33 dimensional space because that's actually what we
see. But when it comes to trying to understand
this, uh, for, uh, dimension of time, it clashes
against our common understanding of time a lot. Uh,
AND so it's, it's very hard for us to
wrap our minds around it,
right? Yeah, definitely.
So, uh, and, uh, I mean, what is the
tense theory of time? I mean, what are tensor
in the context of physics?
Yeah, so tenses are, yeah, so if we think
of these temporal indexicals. Like now and uh you
know, uh, past and future. Those are called tenses
and notice that they're always relative. What the crucial
thing is really this idea that there's a distinguished
now or present. All of the other. TEMPORAL uh
properties are ultimately connected to this idea that there's
a kind of privileged now. Um, AND You know,
so McTaggart famously in 1908 had this paper in
which he talks about uh the tent, uh, these
tense properties. And he calls it the A series.
And Yes you could just, you could look at
all of, you could organize all the events of
the universe and just say which ones are now,
which ones are past, which ones are future. We
could also do what's been called the B series,
the tense list series where I organize all the
events in terms of the earlier than or later
than relations. So Socrates dying, that was earlier than
this our discussion. It was in the past. So
in the first one, I'm using tenseless language. It's
always true that Socrates's death was earlier than our
discussion. Uh, BUT it wasn't always past, you know,
at one point for Socrates, it was present, at
one point for Socrates was in the future, and
both our both our discussion and Socrates' death were
were in the future. So that, so what's one
feature of this, the tense properties are that they
have this kind of changing truth values with with
respect to what time. Uh, YOU, you use them.
And the Mta was really ahead of his time
because You know, this, I mean, identifying this then
became a a a a feature in cognitive linguistics
where people do. You know, look at this kind
of language we use. So it's definitely a real
thing, you know, that we, as we as we
use language, I think it's And I, I'm not
a linguist, so I, I maybe I'm wrong, but
I think it's a, it's Not every language has
tenses exactly, but, but most, all every language has
a way of encoding them in some way, as
far as I understand. And so it seems to
be a pretty universal feature of human language that
we speak in this kind of tense way. And
you can see why, you know, it's a good
shortcut, uh, given the way. Given the way the
physics of the world works and everything, if I
did, if we were in like in the same
room and I just Point to some object and
say it's, you know, like blue. Then I don't,
I don't need to, I could say it's blue
now. I don't need to say, give a whole
elaborate thing about the earlier than later than relations.
Um, And so it's pretty interesting actually because there
you can see a big difference between space and
time and the way we act and think and
talk. Because if I was, uh, suppose, uh, Ricardo,
I was, we were having a dinner and you're
at the opposite side of the table, and I
said, you know, please pass the salt. And you
look around and you're wondering where it is, and
I say, you know, it's on your right. Uh,
SO there I'd be indicating that the spatial indexical
is relative to, you know, I'm understanding that it's
relative to you, might it'll be on my left,
but it might be, it'll be on your right.
That we never do that with time. I don't
say, oh, it's in your future, not mine, or
your past, not mine. Um, AND so, uh, so
we do use this model, and then you can
then see why, so then the 10th theory of
time. Is um Well, so, yeah, so there's, let
me back up a second. So in terms of
language, there's no question we use tenses and we
speak particular ways and we distinguish between what we
might call the spatial tenses and the temporal tenses
in interesting ways. Now what does that mean? Now
sometimes what's called the tense theory of time is
now supposed to then be a theory in metaphysics.
Which then takes those tenses, uh, and thinks of
them as latching onto reality in some way. So
whereas relativity doesn't have a kind of privilege now.
A tense model of time and and understood in
a metaphysical way. Yeah, we'll have a uh uh
positive uh special, a special now in some way,
typically. Then they come in all these different varieties
of metaphysical models, so some say there's just this
present. And it changes in some way. Some say
there's the present, and then there's a real past,
but not a real future. That's called a becoming
model. Then there's all sorts of other models. There's
probably like a couple 100 of them really. Um,
And uh yeah, so that's supposed to then these
models are positive to vindicate that way of speaking
that I mentioned.
But even if you, if our intuitive model of
time is incorrect, uh, do we have a good
understanding of how it develops cognitive cognitively?
Yeah, so that's what I, uh, try to do
in my, in my book, uh, what makes time
special is the the whole idea about half of
the book is to Basically try to come up
with an explanation for why, why it is, even
if it's fundamentally wrong, why it nonetheless makes sense
for creatures like us to come up with this
model and to treat the spatial. So tenses uh
differently than the temporal ones or the spatial indexicles
differently than the temporal indexicles. And you know, so
for me, excuse me, for me, I, I think.
Yeah, it might be wrong, but given our environment,
given our the our cognitive and perceptual and anatomical
uh situation, the kinds of problems we have to
solve to get around in the world, given the
Physics, where the temporal direction is different than the
spatial direction. Um, AND a whole host of other
things. I try to then show why it makes
sense for us to, uh, Develop this kind of
tense model and so I try to vindicate the
tense model as Even, you know, not fundamentally right,
but uh a really good thing for us, uh,
because it helps us, helps us get around. Um,
Yeah, so I, uh, Given the physics and given
a bunch of other things that, you know, I
just can't, I just can't move on the spacetime
manifold in ways or have access to information of
this on the spacetime manifold. In particular ways. That
would, it's so given that, given these constraints, it
makes sense for me to come up with this,
makes sense for human beings, but also I think
animals, uh, probably most animals have. Some kind of
tense conception of time, maybe they don't think about
time, of course, but You know, they don't do
philosophy as far as I know or physics, but,
um, but they still, you know, seem to, there's
some evidence that they employ a kind of the
theory of time as well. And so I think
it's a very It organisms are reacting to a
very Low level basic feature of the universe. And
that is then. You know, creating in them a
uh Reason to think that uh there is this
like preferred now. Oh It's a good organization tool
for us. And for most of those sort of
things you As you're sort of navigating around locally.
You, you know, the signal speeds are are very
fast. And we've become attuned to our, our brains
and our perceptual systems are sort of adapted to.
Try to figure out when the signals that are
reaching us are coming from the same thing or
not. So when somebody is like in front of
you and they say hi. You'll see their lips
move. So then you have the light bouncing off
their lips, going into your eye. So it's going
very fast, the light, you know, the speed of
light, um. Then you'll hear hi. And so then
there'll be sound coming from their mouth, that's then
coming in very, very slowly. Um, BUT your eye
works very slowly versus your ear. So your ear
is kind of mechanical, very fast. Your eye is
photochemical, uh, a bit slower. That's decreasing the, so
if the if the if the if the sound
and the light both came from the same source.
Now you've already decreased the, the gap between the
arrival of the, the light and the sound to
some extent. Then your brain is doing all this
other stuff too. And so you, there will actually
be, you know, some people will. Then bind those
two and think that those two signals came together,
um, if the light comes first, or if the
sound comes first, and so there are light firsters
and soundirsters. Uh, BUT basically if. Uh, YOU know,
if it comes within a certain wind, if these
two signals come within a certain window, you'll tend
to think that they came from the same, the
same source. You then don't need to know then,
you know, which one is earlier than or which
one is later than you can just say, oh,
you know that. That person said hi now. And
I don't need, uh, I don't need to relate
it to some other events. Um, IF you compare
that to like receiving something in the mail. You're
getting your bank statements in the mail. And the
bank statements didn't say what. You know what time
the the bank statement was for. Then the information
would be pretty useless because maybe the mailman or
mailwoman, you know, put it in the box, you
know, the wrong, the wrong order or something like
that. And so the signal, the sign, you know,
if the signal takes a long time and has
all these transmission errors. Then you really needed the,
the, those letters, the information dated. For high You
know, it said to you in the room, you
don't need to say, you know, OK, Ricardo, let's
synchronize watches ready and then hi, uh, you don't
need to do that. You can just say hi
and it's understood that it's now. Um, YEAH, and
so I, I look to see why it then
makes sense to, you know, so all these sorts
of considerations. I like to then see why it
would make sense to come up with the, uh,
Uh, this kind of tense model of time and
treated differently than the Corresponding model of space.
I, I guess that also from a biological slash
evolutionary perspective, uh, we have to keep in mind
that what really matters here for organisms like humans
and other kinds of organisms is, is for them
to have Uh, useful construct of the world in
ways that increases their fitness, right? I mean, of
course, we don't need to have at all any
direct access to objective reality, and I guess that
in terms of other, um, things that we perceive,
like, for example, caller, of course, uh, a physicist
would say that. The color is not uh an
intrinsic property of objects. It's not really there, but
it's useful for organisms to perceive it, to move
in the world and to perhaps eat the correct
things and uh some other aspects of. Uh, THEIR
life where color plays a role. I mean, it's
much more about usefulness than necessarily about the truth
or at least truth index to uh objective reality,
right. Yeah, exactly. Uh, THAT, that's exactly the way
I'm thinking of it. Uh, IN fact, very much
like color. I think of it as a. You
know, very low, low level sort of thing, so
that that's why I think animals and that also
have with color, yeah, yeah, so I think of
it very much like color. um, YEAH, and so
I think of it as, you know, each all
the different animals were all trying to solve this
an evolution, you know, so we're trying to solve
this kind of problem with we're bombarded with all
these signals and the signals don't tell us the
time like a letter does, and so we have
to figure it out, but if we don't figure
it out, we'll die. You know, so you need
to, if you If you know, a, a, a
tiger comes up and roars at you and you're
still, uh, you know, and you're not uh syncing
the visual with the auditory, uh, you know, you
you probably die. And it'll also be very hard
to catch things. And so, but probably all the
different animals do this differently and so they probably
have different simultaneity windows, you know, so I, in
the book I uh talk about probably the giraffe
has not just a long neck, but a long
now uh because if you just think of how,
how long the The nerves from the feet to
the brain to the brain and back on the
giraffe. And that, it doesn't go that fast, the
signal speeds and the nerves, uh, and so when
you think of it like adjusting its foot, uh,
for where, you know, on, on the ground for
bumps on the ground and stuff and it's, you
know, that, that signal is like going like 18
ft or something. And so there's gonna be this
kind of lag, um. And so we, we have
the same kinds of things too, um, but, you
know, the giraffe would be maybe more uh exaggerated.
A seal would be interesting because the speed of
sound, the speed of sound in water is, is
very different than in air. And so all of
these things should should shape the their their um
Um, maybe not there where they don't have a
conception of time, but that maybe the model of
time is very similar to ours, but like the
lengths of the simultaneity windows and things like that
might be very different. Mhm.
And uh getting into a question directly related to
metaphysics, uh, how do you look at the relationship
between uh philosophy of science and in this case,
more specifically philosophy of physics and metaphysics?
Um, Yeah, I, well I think of Well, that's
a big question. Uh, SO yeah, I think of,
uh, I think all of physics as Uh, implicitly
assuming, making very many, um, metaphysical assumptions. Mhm. And
so I, I have a lot, I have a
bunch of things where I'm criticizing metaphysics, but it's
not that I'm anti-metaphysics because I, I do think
that, you know, when we look at physics, we
can And pry into it, we then see that
there are all these different metaphysical assumptions within it.
And so that's what I'm trying to do is
sort of unearth these metaphysical assumptions and uh you
know, try to see what the Physics, uh, what
physics is telling us about the universe. Um, But
you know, there are uh there are uh Bits
of philosophy, you know, some types of philosophy of
time that I think are um You know, misguided
the way they go, you know, so historically philosophy
of time I think has always been one of
the Methodologically, most I don't know if I should
say this um. A public thing, but yeah, um,
like the the most backward areas. You know, so
for so long, it was just doing, you know,
this kind of uh analytic philosophy, uh, this kind
of ordinary language philosophy where the, the way the
game worked was You would find out what the
nature of time was, and, and, and here's how
it would go, you would Um, take a sentence,
you know, in in English or in Portuguese, with
tenses in it, and then see if you could
translate it into a sentence without tenses. And then
if you uh couldn't, then it proved that the
10 theory of time was true and that relativity
was wrong or not fundamentally right, uh. This is
terrible, you know, why, you know, so we know
that you can't because of the essential index, we
know that you can't translate. Statements from with indexicals
to, uh, with, you know, you can't translate the
sta uh statements that are in with indexicals into
non-indexicals and retain the same meaning. And You know,
that argument was always bad anyway, even, you know,
because you could, it would do that, you, you
know, it would prove too much because, because, you
know, you could do it with other index skills
like spatial ones and personal pronouns and and things
like that. And so it ends up proving too
much. And so Anyway, so it's like a mugs
game. You know, if you got into it because,
you know, if you wanted to. Defend, uh, anything
but the tense there of time and you start
to play this game, you were, you were destined
to lose, uh, but, you know, the game was
rigged because you could never do this. So they
changed the rules of the game and maybe the,
you know, started to change it and maybe I
don't know, the 80s and 90s, then people would
say, well, no, now we're interested just in the
truth makers for these claims, not, not translating without
loss of meaning. Um, But you know, still it
it it it came down to somewhat. Fairly similar
sort of games still. Um, And then to me,
the big thing has always been that you could
posit as many models as you like, all these,
all these really elaborate metaphysical models. But what is
the evidence for those models? What do they explain?
And I've always thought that they were lacking explanatorily.
Uh, SO, the, the core thing really is that
they're all They're all positing some kind of now
or present. And the only difference between the events
that are now and the events that are not
now, they say usually is that the events that
are now exist and the events that are not
now don't exist. Of course, existence is I, you
know, what kind of property is existence? Well, a
well on the standard way of thinking it's not
a property at all. But even if you took
a view where it's a property, it's, uh, you
know, a property that has no, no character, no,
no, no, no essence to it whatsoever. And so
then, but then how can that feature into the
causal network of the world in any way? And
so it's never gonna be most explanations are causal
explanations, and so you're not going to end up
uh being able to say that there's any kind
of causal explanation for why you have the phenomenon
we have or the data we have. Um, SO
best, it's gonna vindicate some linguistic intuitions. But I
think it's better to Uh, we'll do what I
try to do, which is just try to show
how this model arises, uh, in order to try
to vindicate those intuitions.
So, do you think that when it comes to
metaphysics. We should derive metaphysics from physics. I mean,
the, in this case, the philosophy from the science
or not necessarily.
Um, YEAH, I don't wanna make it too differential
to physics that uh we just look at the
physics and then Um, You know, derive it from
there because I think sometimes the physics is it's
a two-way street and sometimes the physics can be
wrong, I think, or in Not properly interpreted. Um,
So I think it's a two-way street, and of
course there's more the world that the world of
science and physics too and there's biology, you know,
and everything else. Um, BUT I do think, you
know, there, there has been this kind of trend
in analytic philosophy where uh it's wants to vindicate
the linguistic intuitions too much, doesn't really care about
the, how much it's gonna explain. Now people who
disagree with me will they'll say, oh, but we
are explaining. You know, just like in science and
science uses all these kind of theoretical virtues like
simplicity and that too. And so they'll say, oh,
we're all just using infants to the best explanation.
I think that that's really, you know, maybe if,
maybe, maybe OK at one level, that's true, but,
you know, if we dive in and and actually
compare that kind of uh just absolutely brutal critical
process that happens in science and just the high,
how high the standards are for scientific theory to
actually explain, you know, be taken to explain something.
And then the very modest things that these metaphysical
models end up explaining. You know, then I think
it's really more like night and day difference uh
than uh doing the same thing. Mhm.
So, let me then just ask you one last
question. We've been focusing our conversation a lot on
time, but uh looking at physics more generally and
as a philosopher of physics, what would you say
are perhaps some of the biggest or at least
what you consider to be the most interesting unanswered
questions in physics?
Oh, Uh, well, yeah, I'd have to start with
all the puzzles, you know, that quantum mechanics provides,
you know, so we have massive. Debates and disagreements
over what to make of, you know, quantum non-locality
and um Uh, you know, just, uh, the measurement
problem. And so I think that resolving those are
key to Uh, you know, many other things, you
know, so that what's happened is we've, that kind
of foundational philosophical questions have been sort of shunted
aside for a long time. And you know, so
you've had the Copenhagen kind of understanding of quantum
mechanics, making it so that you're not able to
ask, you know, you're not supposed to ask a
lot of questions about the awkward questions about what's
going on. But then when you look at um
You know, you're trying to develop quantum gravity, and
come up with a theory that will uni, you
know, or make consistent gravity with uh quantum mechanics.
It seems crazy to me to think that what
quantum theory of quantum mechanics is is actually right,
won't matter to that question. And so you're sort
of trying to you know, produce this consistent or
unified new theory, but you've got your hands tied
behind your back because you're not allowed to speak
about what 111 half of that equation, you know,
what, what that world is really like. And so
I think understanding better quantum nonlocality is, is really
one way uh this quantum no locality comes up
in. And a lot of that, uh, but the
really the the correct interpretation of the quantum mechanics
is really one of the core things. Um, But
yeah, there, there's so many other uh questions too,
uh, but that's just one.
Yeah, but, but that, OK, so let me just
ask you a more specific thing then. Do you
think that at this point we would be anywhere
close to finally developing uh or having a theory
of everything, uh, or, uh, I guess at least,
uh, following, I guess the main line that people
have been proposing anywhere near unifying uh relativity with
quantum mechanics or not?
Yeah, I don't think we're any closer than we've
been for, and we haven't been close, I think,
for, you know, to a theory of everything. Um,
I mean, even Hawking gave up on the idea
that there could be a theory of everything. Um,
AND so I'm not even convinced that there could
be a theory of everything. Um, BUT we could
hope for a theory of quantum gravity. But now,
but boy, now that's been a long, long time
that people have been trying to work on that
and it doesn't seem like we're any, you know,
the different research programs of Become far more developed
than they were, like when I started in. Grad
school, you know, now. The different programs are much
more sophisticated than they were, uh, but you can't
really say that there's any closer to. Um, You
know, it being decided which one is the right
one or or. Or connecting it with experiments in
any way, and so we still seem very far
away.
Great. So, uh, and where can people find you
and your work on the internet?
Yeah, you just need to go to my name,
uh, Craig Callender, uh, then type that in Craigcalendar.com.
Uh, YOU can come to my website.
Great. So I'm leaving uh links to that in
the description box of the interview and thank you
so much again for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been a great pleasure to
talk with you.
Oh, it's been great, wonderful. Thank you very much,
Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
mere Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelisky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Acosta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Heringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff McMahon,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernardin Curtis
Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal N Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.